1. What is Semantic HTML?

Semantic HTML refers to using HTML tags that have meaningful names and clearly describe their purpose in the document structure.
Examples: <header>, <footer>, <article>, <section>, <nav>, <main>.
These improve accessibility, SEO, and code readability, as browsers and assistive technologies can better interpret the content.

2. How does CSS Flexbox differ from Grid?

Flexbox is one-dimensional — it arranges elements either in a row or a column. It’s ideal for aligning and distributing space within a container.

Grid is two-dimensional — it allows layout in both rows and columns simultaneously. It’s used for complex page layouts.
In short: Use Flexbox for alignment and Grid for structure.

3. What are Media Queries?

Media queries allow CSS to adapt styles based on device characteristics, such as screen width, height, or orientation.
Example:

@media (max-width: 768px) {
  body { font-size: 14px; }
}


They’re essential for responsive design, ensuring websites look good on all devices.

4. How do you make a website responsive?

A website becomes responsive through:

Fluid layouts using relative units (%, vw, vh, rem) instead of fixed pixels.

Media queries to adjust design at breakpoints.

Flexible images and media (max-width: 100%).

Modern layout tools like Flexbox and Grid.

Mobile-first approach — design for small screens first, then scale up.

5. Explain the Box Model.

Every HTML element is a rectangular box composed of:

Content – text or images inside the box

Padding – space between content and border

Border – wraps around padding and content

Margin – space outside the border separating elements
Understanding the box model is critical for layout and spacing control.

6. What is the difference between classes and IDs in CSS?

Classes (.classname): Reusable, can be applied to multiple elements.

IDs (#idname): Unique, used for a single element per page.
Specificity: IDs have higher specificity than classes — meaning they override class styles when both are applied.

7. How can you optimize CSS for performance?

Minify and combine CSS files to reduce HTTP requests.

Use shorthand properties to simplify code.

Avoid deep selectors (keep specificity low).

Use external stylesheets for caching.

Load critical CSS inline and defer non-critical styles.

Use modern tools like PostCSS, PurgeCSS to remove unused styles.

8. What is the difference between relative and absolute positioning?

Relative positioning: Positions an element relative to its original location.

Absolute positioning: Positions an element relative to its closest positioned ancestor (or the viewport if none exists).
Absolute elements are removed from the normal document flow, while relative ones remain in it.

9. How does the z-index property work?

z-index controls the stacking order of elements along the z-axis (which elements appear on top).
It only works on positioned elements (position: relative, absolute, fixed, sticky).
Higher z-index values appear above lower ones, but stacking context rules (like opacity, transform, etc.) can influence it.

10. What is the difference between padding and margin?

Padding: Space inside the element’s border — between the content and border.
Margin: Space outside the element’s border — between the border and other elements.
Padding affects the element’s background area, while margin affects the space between elements.
